(docs) Extend alerting page with flow failure notifications (#409)
kestra-io/kestra.io: content/docs/09.administrator-guide/03.monitoring/index.md

---
title: Alerting & Monitoring
---

## Alerting

Failure alerts are non-negotiable. When a production workflow fails, you should get notified about it as soon as possible. To implement failure alerting, you can leverage Kestra's built in notification tasks, including: 
- [Slack](../../../plugins/plugin-notifications/tasks/slack/io.kestra.plugin.notifications.slack.slackexecution.md) 
- [Microsoft Teams](../../../plugins/plugin-notifications/tasks/teams/io.kestra.plugin.notifications.teams.teamsexecution.md) 
- [Email](../../../plugins/plugin-notifications/tasks/mail/io.kestra.plugin.notifications.mail.mailexecution.md)

Technically, you can add custom failure alerts to each flow separately using the [`errors` tasks](../../02.tutorial/06.errors.md):

```yaml
id: onFailureAlert
namespace: blueprint

tasks:
  - id: fail
    type: io.kestra.plugin.scripts.shell.Commands
    runner: PROCESS
    commands:
      - exit 1

errors:
  - id: slack

>     type: io.kestra.plugin.notifications.slack.SlackIncomingWebhook

Reviewer: Better to use a SlackExecution and explain that the template can be customized by using a SlackIncommingWebhook.
Each notification plugin comes with 2 tasks, one with an execution message (meaning a message that includes the information of the status of an execution) and one where the message can be customized.

Author: yup, the SlackExecution only works in triggers and listeners, that's why here we use IncomingWebhook. It doesn't work on `errors`. Please share a flow example if this is not true. 

Regarding:
> On the Alerting and Monitoring page, one day we should provide a "Sanity Check" flow and explain that Kestra can be monitored externally by calling periodically this flow (for ex with a webhook).

do you want to open a dedicated issue? I was convinced that such monitoring flow is not needed because of the already existing healthcheck endpoint http://localhost:8081/health

Reviewer: > SlackExecution only works in triggers and listeners

OK then.

> do you want to open a dedicated issue? I was convinced that such monitoring flow is not needed because of the already existing healthcheck endpoint http://localhost:8081/health

It tests more than just "the port is open", it can be a complete sanity check that checks DB connectivity, queue functionality, internal storage, ... I'll open an issue for that.

Author: ahh I see, that makes sense, thanks so much!

```yaml
id: failureAlertToSlack
namespace: prod.monitoring

tasks:
  - id: send
    type: io.kestra.plugin.notifications.slack.SlackExecution
    url: "{{ secret('SLACK_WEBHOOK') }}"
    channel: "#general"
    executionId: "{{trigger.executionId}}"

triggers:
  - id: listen
    type: io.kestra.core.models.triggers.types.Flow
    conditions:
      - type: io.kestra.core.models.conditions.types.ExecutionStatusCondition
        in:
          - FAILED
          - WARNING
      - type: io.kestra.core.models.conditions.types.ExecutionNamespaceCondition
        namespace: prod
        prefix: true
```

Adding this single flow will ensure that you receive a Slack alert on any flow failure in the `prod` namespace. Here is an example alert notification:

![alert notification](/docs/administrator-guide/alert-notification.png)

## Monitoring 

By default, Kestra exposes a monitoring endpoint on port 8081. You can change this port using the `endpoints.all.port` property in the [configuration options](../01.configuration/index.md).

> This monitoring endpoint provides invaluable information for troubleshooting and monitoring, including Prometheus metrics and several Kestra's internal routes.

Reviewer: It may be worth talking directly about `/health` which is the healthcheck as otherwise it's at the end of the page.

Author: good idea, let me add it

|executor.taskrun.next.count|`COUNTER`|Count of tasks found|
|executor.taskrun.ended.count|`COUNTER`|Count of tasks ended|
|executor.taskrun.ended.duration|`TIMER`|Duration of tasks ended|
|executor.workertaskresult.count|`COUNTER`|Count of task results sent by a worker|
|executor.execution.started.count|`COUNTER`|Count of executions started|
|executor.execution.end.count|`COUNTER`|Count of executions ended|
|executor.execution.duration|`TIMER`|Duration of executions ended|

#### Indexer

|Metrics|Type| Description                               |
|-|-|-------------------------------------------|

> |indexer.count|`COUNTER`| Count of indexers sent to a repository      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|indexer.count|`COUNTER`| Count of index requests sent to a repository      |
```

> |indexer.duration|`DURATION`| Duration of indexers sent to a repository |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|indexer.duration|`DURATION`| Duration of index requests sent to a repository |
```

#### Scheduler

|Metrics|Type| Description                                                                                         |
|-|-|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|scheduler.trigger.count|`COUNTER`| Count of triggers                                                                                   |

> |scheduler.evaluate.running.count|`COUNTER`| Evaluation of triggers actually running (equivalent to the number of threads used by the scheduler) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|scheduler.evaluate.running.count|`COUNTER`| Evaluation of triggers actually running|
```

The last part is no longer accurate.
